 
This is a message from a dying civilisation. 

Can you even read this? Is there a guidebook on human languages and how they work included in this archive?

I'm Mateo – I’m 25 years old. I live in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. I’m an art student and filmmaker/visual artist – or at least trying to be one. I’m writing in English because it’s kind of considered a ‘universal' language in our society but there are many other languages too. Many ways to communicate. Many ways to connect to each other, to collaborate, to help, but also to hurt, alienate, dehumanise and deny solidarity to others, whether it is with other humans or with other lifeforms in our ecosystem.

Now it feels like a time where things are falling apart. I always grew up with this idea that we were all, in however minuscule ways, contributing to this huge project of ‘human civilisation’. Part of me still believes in that project somehow, that somehow people will remember me, my work and ideas, or maybe just my genes getting passed on. 

But now we don’t really know anymore. Our leaders don’t have the will to stand up against the profit of a small elite in order to prevent a catastrophic breakdown of our climate systems and the way they facilitates life on our planet. The majority of us are kept ignorant or in denial and we don’t seem anywhere close to cause the political revolution that we need in order to actually save our existence as we know it. Paradoxically, the rich people and private companies funding this archive are probably also part of the whole problem in the first place.

Maybe the way some of us deal with the knowledge of our mortality is to convince ourselves of the immortality of a greater kind of self:, our human culture.

But what I am here for then, if this ‘human civilisation’ project is coming to an end?

Maybe you’re already familiar with all of this. Maybe you have access to a bunch of different human's accounts. Maybe you’re an expert archeologist from an alien race, digging through the remains of the last part of the anthropocene. Maybe it’s more interesting to talk about less rational things. Things more unique to me but maybe somehow also more universally human (this is the kind of thing that some people try to teach you if pursue a career in art).

About four years ago I made a little book for someone that I was in love with. I wrote down something like:

"One day, the world will shatter into a billion tiny pieces and one of those pieces will be a fragment of this paper, that shows, not proves, that we created something as real as something could be”.

I’m really happy to still be in love with that person. And perhaps in a bittersweet kind of way, I’m really happy that I still believe in what I wrote. I think that's why I’m here, writing into this near-certain void. Somewhere I still believe that we’re somehow eternal, even if all that’s left is a particle of bone dust flying through space. Somehow I believe that our moments of love and joy are deeply meaningful and inextricably tied with the fate of the universe – however fleeting and small they may be. Is this a very hopeful thought? I think it’s also a very human thought.

Humans are incredibly hopeful creatures. Maybe that’s going to be our downfall, that too many of us stayed hopeful about the way we were taught things are supposed to work when it was clearly destroying so much of what we love, when it was cancelling so many better, fairer futures that never ended up happening.


This is a poem in Spanish and Dutch I wrote for a film I’m working on. It was a way of coming to terms with how my real, mortal, physical self was never going to live up to the idealised imaged I had constructed of myself. But in the film I also loosely related it to lost futures in general, especially in a time of political uncertainty.

Perhaps it will give you some kind of insight on how one particular human chose to express themselves.

’there is a ghost of me / er is een geest van mij’

SOMEWHERE
IN LIMA
WHERE HISTORIC HOUSES ARE SET ON FIRE
SOMEWHERE
IN NY & DC
AFTER THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
SOMEWHERE
IN AMSTERDAM
WHERE ABANDONED HOUSES WHISPER ABOUT THE PAST
SOMWHERE
IN MY HEAD
GUTS
SPINE
…
GHOSTS HAUNT
 

er is een geest van mij
die ergens buiten, ergens ver van hier
een doosje met zacht, gloeiend licht vond

er is een geest van mij die ergens dwarrelt, zweeft
altijd op het juiste moment
die door de grond onder je voeten kruipt
door de zonovergoten middenweg glijdt
zich een weg baant door een warme, donkere oceaan
en nooit achterom kijkt

er is een geest
die op de hoek van de javastraat een uitzonderlijk mens werd
die in een turkse pizza het centrum van het universum zag
die in een eindeloze zomer omringd werd door nimfen met zwart haar

er is een geest

altijd
compleet

me sacaron la muela del juicio y la metieron en un sobrecito
me rellenaron las caries con palabritas tiernas y manzanilla
al final, mis raíces se infectaron
el mismo día que regreso el fascismo
recién el año pasado, me dijeron que ya no tenia dientes de le leche
y que no se podía
y que no se podía

er is een geest

piepkleine deeltjes nestelen zich in mijn longen
ze fluisteren of het oké gaat, of ik het goed doe, hoe het op school gaat
terwijl ze langzaam hun mondjes openen, klaar om te bijten

perdí a mi sombra en un cruce peatonal
en aviación con angamos
desde ahí está rumbando
viviendo lo que nunca pude
sintiendo lo que nunca pude
sin miedo
como nunca pude

mijn knarsende tanden, mijn slijtende kraakbeen
ze brokkelen langzaam af
en vormen kleine hoopjes van kalk, verspreid door de stad

recuerdos de una juventud erosionada

ik heb een haartje van geluk gestopt in een emmer
ik heb er schoonmaakazijn bij gegoten
ik heb precies anderhalve maand gewacht en de rest van de voorgeschreven stappen gevolgd
ik ben nog steeds aan het wachten

wat gebeurt er met de geesten die geen lichaam vinden?
de ideeën die niet uitkomen?
wat gebeurt er met het vogeltje dat gehijg in haar nek voelt?

ik weet waarom het spookt
ik weet waarom het monster niet alleen ’s nachts naar buiten komt
ik weet waarom het lijf nooit compleet voelt

er is een geest

es como encontrarte a tu doble caminando por la calle
y que te cuente sobre todos los futuros que nunca llegaron

escuchando al vacío en la costa verde
descamando la piel en el jirón de la unión

es como llegar a la casa que construiste
y verla incendiada

cuando nace un bebé
aparece un fantasma

er is een geest zonder tegenstelling
zonder jeuk, twijfel, bloed
zonder ziel

als een opgezet dier staart ie me aan
met zijn dode, glazige ogen

como un chullachaqui
como una sombra
como una ruina
una imagen
una cáscara
sin cuerpo
un espectro
una farsa

hay un fantasma mío

…

translation

there is a ghost of me
who, outside, somewhere far from here
found a box of soft, glowing light

there is a ghost of me who drifts, floats somewhere
always at the right time
who crawls through the ground under your feet
glides through the sun-drenched middenweg
makes his way through a warm, dark ocean
and never looks back

there is a ghost
who became an extraordinary person on the corner of the javastraat
who saw the center of the universe in a turkish pizza
who was surrounded by nymphs with black hair in an endless summer

there is a ghost

always
complete

they pulled out my wisdom tooth and put it in a tiny envelope
they filled my cavities with sweet words and camomile
eventually, my roots got infected
the same day that fascism came back
only last year, they told me that i didn’t have milk teeth anymore
and that it wasn’t possible
and that it wasn’t possible

there is a ghost

tiny particles nest in my lungs
they whisper if it’s going alright, if i’m doing well, how it’s going at school
while slowly opening their little mouths, ready to bite

i lost my shadow at a pedestrian crossing
on aviación and angamos
from there it’s been roaming
living what i never could
feeling what i never could
fearless
like i never could

my grinding teeth, my wearing cartilage
they slowly crumble off
and form little piles of calcium, spread across town

memories of an eroded youth

i’ve put a little hair of fortune in a bucket
i’ve added cleaning vinegar
i’ve waited for exactly a month and a half and followed the rest of the prescribed steps
i’m still waiting

what happens to the ghosts who don’t find a body?
the ideas that don’t come out?
what happens to the little bird who hears breathing down her neck? 

i know why it’s haunted
i know why the monster doesn’t only come out at night
i know why the body never feels complete

there is a ghost

it’s like running into your double walking down the street
and that they tell you about all the futures that never arrived

listening to the void on the costa verde
shedding skin on the jirón de la unión

it’s like arriving at the house you built
and seeing it’s on fire

when a baby is born
a ghost appears

there is a ghost without contradiction
without itch, doubt, blood
without soul

like a stuffed animal he stares at me with his dead, glassy eyes

like a chullachaqui
like a shadow
like a ruin
an image
a skin
without body
a spectre
a farce

there is a ghost of me
